KHLESTAKOV. What's the use? I know them anyway.

MARYA. I love them so.

KHLESTAKOV. I have lots of them--of every sort. If you like, for
example, I'll give you this: "Oh, thou, mortal man, who in thy anguish
murmurest against God--" and others. I can't remember them now. Besides,
it's all bosh. I'd rather offer you my love instead, which ever since
your first glance--[Moves his chair nearer.]

MARYA. Love? I don't understand love. I never knew what love is. [Moves
her chair away.]

KHLESTAKOV. Why do you move your chair away? It is better for us to sit
near each other.

MARYA [moving away]. Why near? It's all the same if it's far away.

KHLESTAKOV [moving nearer]. Why far? It's all the same if it's near.

MARYA [moving away]. But what for?

KHLESTAKOV [moving nearer]. It only seems near to you. Imagine it's far.
How happy I would be, mademoiselle, if I could clasp you in my embrace.

MARYA [looking through the window]. What is that? It looked as if
something had flown by. Was it a magpie or some other bird?

KHLESTAKOV [kisses her shoulder and looks through the window]. It's a
magpie.

MARYA [rises indignantly]. No, that's too much--Such rudeness, such
impertinence.

KHLESTAKOV [holding her back]. Forgive me, mademoiselle. I did it only
out of love--only out of love, nothing else.

MARYA. You take me for a silly provincial wench. [Struggles to go away.]

KHLESTAKOV [still holding her back]. It's out of love, really--out of
love. It was just a little fun. Marya Antonovna, don't be angry. I'm
ready to beg your forgiveness on my knees. [Falls on his knees.] Forgive
me, do forgive me! You see, I am on my knees.



SCENE XIII


The same and Anna Andreyevna.

ANNA [seeing Khlestakov on his knees]. Oh, what a situation!

KHLESTAKOV [rising]. Oh, the devil!

ANNA [to Marya]. What does this mean? What does this behavior mean?

MARYA. I, mother--

ANNA. Go away from here. Do you hear? And don't you dare to show your
face to me. [Marya goes out in tears.] Excuse me. I must say I'm greatly
astonished.

KHLESTAKOV [aside]. She's very appetizing, too. She's not bad-looking,
either. [Flings himself on his knees.] Madam, you see I am burning with
love.

ANNA. What! You on your knees? Please get up, please get up. This floor
isn't very clean.

KHLESTAKOV. No, I must be on my knees before you. I must. Pronounce the
verdict. Is it life or death?

ANNA. But please--I don't quite understand the significance of your
words. If I am not mistaken, you are making a proposal for my daughter.

KHLESTAKOV. No, I am in love with you. My life hangs by a thread. If you
don't crown my steadfast love, then I am not fit to exist in this world.
With a burning flame in my bosom, I pray for your hand.

ANNA. But please remember I am in a certain way--married.

KHLESTAKOV. That's nothing. Love knows no distinction. It was Karamzin
who said: "The laws condemn." We will fly in the shadow of a brook. Your
hand! I pray for your hand!



SCENE XIV


The same and Marya Antonovna.

MARYA [running in suddenly]. Mamma, papa says you should--[seeing
Khlestakov on his knees, exclaims:] Oh, what a situation!
