ANNA. Well, what do you want? Why did you come in here? What for? What
sort of flightiness is this? Breaks in like a cat leaping out of smoke.
Well, what have you found so wonderful? What's gotten into your head
again? Really, she behaves like a child of three. She doesn't act a bit
like a girl of eighteen, not a bit. I don't know when you'll get more
sense into your head, when you'll behave like a decent, well-bred girl,
when you'll know what good manners are and a proper demeanor.

MARYA [through her tears]. Mamma, I really didn't know--

ANNA. There's always a breeze blowing through your head. You act like
Liapkin-Tiapkin's daughter. Why should you imitate them? You shouldn't
imitate them. You have other examples to follow. You have your mother
before you. She's the example to follow.

KHLESTAKOV [seizing Marya's hand]. Anna Andreyevna, don't oppose our
happiness. Give your blessing to our constant love.

ANNA [in surprise]. So it's in her you are--

KHLESTAKOV. Decide--life or death?

ANNA. Well, there, you fool, you see? Our guest is pleased to go down on
his knees for such trash as you. You, running in suddenly as if you
were out of your mind. Really, it would be just what you deserve, if I
refused. You are not worthy of such happiness.

MARYA. I won't do it again, mamma, really I won't.



SCENE XV


The same and the Governor in precipitate haste.

GOVERNOR. Your Excellency, don't ruin me, don't ruin me.

KHLESTAKOV. What's the matter?

GOVERNOR. The merchants have complained to your Excellency. I assure you
on my honor that not one half of what they said is so. They themselves
are cheats. They give short measure and short weight. The officer's
widow lied to you when she said I flogged her. She lied, upon my word,
she lied. She flogged herself.

KHLESTAKOV. The devil take the officer's widow. What do I care about the
officer's widow.

GOVERNOR. Don't believe them, don't believe them. They are rank liars; a
mere child wouldn't believe them. They are known all over town as liars.
And as for cheating, I venture to inform you that there are no swindlers
like them in the whole of creation.

ANNA. Do you know what honor Ivan Aleksandrovich is bestowing upon us?
He is asking for our daughter's hand.

GOVERNOR. What are you talking about? Mother has lost her wits. Please
do not be angry, your Excellency. She has a touch of insanity. Her
mother was like that, too.

KHLESTAKOV. Yes, I am really asking for your daughter's hand. I am in
love with her.

GOVERNOR. I cannot believe it, your Excellency.

ANNA. But when you are told!

KHLESTAKOV. I am not joking. I could go crazy, I am so in love.

GOVERNOR. I daren't believe it. I am unworthy of such an honor.

KHLESTAKOV. If you don't consent to give me your daughter Marya
Antonovna's hand, then I am ready to do the devil knows what.

GOVERNOR. I cannot believe it. You deign to joke, your Excellency.

ANNA. My, what a blockhead! Really! When you are told over and over
again!

GOVERNOR. I can't believe it.

KHLESTAKOV. Give her to me, give her to me! I am a desperate man and
I may do anything. If I shoot myself, you will have a law-suit on your
hands.

GOVERNOR. Oh, my God! I am not guilty either in thought or in action.
Please do not be angry. Be pleased to act as your mercy wills. Really,
my head is in such a state I don't know what is happening. I have turned
into a worse fool than I've ever been in my life.

ANNA. Well, give your blessing.

Khlestakov goes up to Marya Antonovna.

GOVERNOR. May God bless you, but I am not guilty. [Khlestakov kisses
Marya. The Governor looks at them.] What the devil! It's really so.
[Rubs his eyes.] They are kissing. Oh, heavens! They are kissing.
Actually to be our son-in-law! [Cries out, jumping with glee.] Ho,
Anton! Ho, Anton! Ho, Governor! So that's the turn events have taken!
